# Discovery of Ill-Known Motifs in Time Series Data

*Discovery of Ill-Known Motifs in Time Series Data*
Deppe, Sahar
Springer Vieweg, Lemgo, Germany, 2022

CSS Terms: ???


This is a Deppe's PhD dissertation, apparently unaltered (the text occasionally
mentions things like "time series constitute this dissertations main scope"
(9). As such, it is a dense work, but the main outlines should be clear to
anyone willing to invest a little time in reading it.

Like me, the "ill-known" in the title of this book may puzzled you, as ordinary
English would seem to call for "little-known" or "unknown." But apparently
"ill-known" is a standard term in set theory, so the author is not to blame for
its awkwardness.

And what of these "motifs"? What are they? Deppe writes:

"In literature, motifs have been addressed as recurring patterns, frequent
trends or subsequences, shapes, and episodes. Regardless of these various
designations, all these terms refer [to] the same goal, namely the detection of
frequent unknown patterns." (2)

This is another example of the frequently awkward English littered throughout
this book. The motifs themselves do not "refer" to any goal: rather, they are
concepts employed in pursuing the goal of finding regular patterns in the data.
It is true that we know what the author meant. But a fundamental principle of
sound writing is to say what you meant, not say something else and hope the
reader can suss out what you meant.

The chapter titled "General Principles of Time Series Motif Discovery" offers a
useful sketch of how Sutch discovery proceeds: the data is first pre-processed,
then put into a common representation. Similarity measurements are then
performed on this process data, hopefully resulting in the discovery of
interesting motifs.



This is a difficult and dense book. For those well-versed in the mathematics of
harmonics and waves, the book should prove very useful in showing how these
theories can be applied to data series. But even those who are not specialists
in this area, such as your humble reviewer, can still gain many ideas from this
useful tome.
