# Michael Oakeshott on the Human Condition

## Essays by Timothy Fuller


Modes: 

Fuller writes that, "for the philosopher such a proclamation of self-satisfaction must be treated with skepticism." (4)

Treating them with "skepticism" implies that such a view might be correct. But it seems to me that Oakeshott views them
as demonstrably mistaken: since the modes construct from the whole of experience " a restricted world of abstract ideas"
(EAIM 70), they are necessarily partial and defective. No, Fuller understands this quite well, as shown by the next few
pages of his essay. But that makes the choice of "skeptical" more puzzling, not less.


Fuller next takes up the work of John Hopkins political theorist Richard Flathman, looks at authority, using an
"amalgamation of elements from different categories of understanding" 58

Thus, like Locke, Flathman would have it two ways at once: the threat of the appeal to heaven will help keep the
authorities skittish about the exercise of authority, and most people will perhaps find it to their advantage to be
governed by those who are skittish about governing" 64


The next essay is the text of the eulogy that Fuller delivered at the LSE memorial service following Oakeshott's
passing. In it, we learn of Oakeshott's for the American West, and his non-utilitarian understanding of the purpose of
higher education. 


The chapter entitled "Michael Oakeshott's Political Thought" intriguingly begins with an extended discussion of his
religious thought. This is an aspect of Oakeshott's interests that, after the early 1930s, he was "reticent" to discuss,
but Fuller tells us that his study of theology was a lifelong pursuit. Fuller notes that "[Oakeshott] thought that St.
Augustine enjoyed the greatest religious imagination within our tradition and after him Pascal" 83.


Franco and Orr can't both be correct, and one wishes Fuller had tried to adjudicate their dispute a little more
decisively. I suspect that he, like I, would come down on the side of Franco, and say that Orr simply misunderstood what
Oakeshott was up to.

Agents: 87

MO explained right in the very book Orr objects to what he was up to: he was "dropping anchor" with a certain set of
theoretical nets to see what fish could be caught at that location.




"MO was not urging us to be conservative â€“ he was arguing that we could not help but be so. To deny this is not only to
disguise the truth about ourselves, but also to lead us into ill-considered projects for transforming the human race"
104

But to embark upon "ill-considered projects for transforming the human race" would seem to me to be the very paradigm of
being "not conservative."




Fuller writes, of MO's concept of civil association:

"The civil association requires someone to occupy an office of authority that is acknowledged as the source of
authoritative pronouncements... the occupant of an office like this is not privileged with special insight or knowledge..."
106

This is MO's and Fuller's answer to the rather fatuous libertarian argument that claims that any justification for the
existence of government relies on the idea that government officials are infallible, or at least much better than the
rest of us, when it comes to making practical decisions about social matters. The justification for having an umpire in
a baseball game is not that the umpire understands baseball better than the players, or that he is infallible or even
better than the players at determining what is a ball and what is a strike, but merely that it is desirable to have
someone whose pronouncements on the matter are authoritative and final. Both the pitcher and the batter may, in general,
be better judges of what is a ball and what is a strike than the umpire. But clearly, given that they are not
disinterested parties about the distinction, they will often disagree. And then there must be someone possessed of an
office with the authority to decide "ball or strike," or the game cannot proceed. (Oakeshott notes that the laws of
civil association "are not the rules of a game," but that does not mean they do not bear many similarities to the rules
of a game.)

Furthermore, there must be a way to decide where the strike zone is, is there such a thing as an "infield fly rule," and
when does it apply? Such decisions quite obviously cannot occur without an entity authorized to make them.


Speaking of the world of practice, Fuller writes "So far, no 'what is' has ever ended challenges from further thoughts
of what ought to be" 141. Well, that is true, it seems off from MO's main point, which is that such a happening would
dissolve the practical mode, since it's primary presupposition is that the existing world is in some sense
unsatisfactory, and requires practical action to render it more satisfactory. (On this point, MO is remarkably like
Ludwig von Mises, who noted that action requires "felt unease.") so long as there is a world of practice, it is not
merely that "not yet" have we ever found our current situation completely satisfactory, but with certainty we never
will. And Fuller follows up his statement with a quote from MO that makes exactly this point.





"So long as the future is an essential element in practical appraisal, coherence has to elude us" 162

Here, the "so long as" is again puzzling: it is not as if the future could cease to be an essential element in practical
appraisal. Appraisal without an eye to the future is not something that might crop in future practical activity:
instead, it would mean we had left the world of practice behind.


An unfortunate aspect of these essays is that many of them are intended as introductions to the thought of Oakeshott,
and thus there is a high degree of repetitiveness in them. For instance, the story of the Chinese wheelwright skeptical
of book learning is told no fewer than three times. To repeat the story in essays published years apart in different
outlets is understandable, but a little judicious editing might have relieved some of the repetition
once these essays were collected together.

Despite this flaw, This collection of essays is an Excellent introduction to Oakeshott start for the newcomer. Those
more familiar with MO should still find a pact with insights into the thinker that will make reading the volume
worthwhile.


