# The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free
Market Era

Gary Gerstle

Oxford University Press: New York, 2022, 406 pages, $27.95


"Steve Fraser and I introduced the concept of political order in a 1989 book
that we co-edited..." (3) Unfortunately for this claim, Eric Voegelin wrote a
five-volume series, *Order and History*, from 1956 through 1987, devoted to the
topic of political orders.



"The ethnonationalist leaders, Trump included... wanted the planet to be
governed by force rather than by international law and multinational
nongovernmental organizations..." (277)

OK, by what possible "international law" could multinational, non-governmental
organizations "govern the planet"? But it gets even worse: Gerstle goes on to
say that Trump was making real a vision of a future in which the US would
withdraw from its "role its role as the world’s global policeman, and from its
responsibility as the enforcer of liberal and neoliberal rules of global
order."

In other words, the world Gerstle liked *was* being ruled by force: US force
attacking countries that did not conform to rules of the global order created by
the US and its allies. (See, for instance, Iraq, 2003.)
And when he complains that Trump wanted a global order
ruled by force, what he really means is that Trump was threatening to stop
ruling the globe by force!


"Suddenly, and for the first moment in the nations, petroleum age, Americans
could not get enough gasoline."  (60)

This is economic nonsense: there is no amount of some commodity that is
"enough" independent of its price. At lower prices, people will demand a
greater quantity of a product, and at higher prices, they will demand a smaller
one. If the price of gasoline had been allowed to rise to reflect the OPEC
restrictions, Americans would’ve had just as much gasoline as they wished to
use at that cost.



Buchanan: "And there were the brave people of Koreatown..."



