A Philospher's Economist: Hume and the Rise of Capitalism
==========================================================

Margaret Schabas and Carl Wennerlind.

*A Philospher's Economist: Hume and the Rise of Capitalism*.

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2020. 316 pages.

---

Schabas and Wennerlid have written this book with two apparent aims:

1. To survey the breadth of Hume's economic thought; and
1. To convince the reader that, rather than being a philosopher who
occasionally commented on economics, "Hume was engaged in thinking and writing
about economics for his entire adult life and... his contributions are
extensive and significant" (5) and that "Hume's life and writings form an
integral whole centered on economics" (6).

In their introduction, the authors sometimes wax rhapsodic about Hume's
accomplishments, writing, for instance, of "his vision for the future of
humanity" (1), or declaring that "His philosophical tenets continue to spread
like the roots and branches of a majestic tree" (3). (And about that
metaphor: What is the distinction between those tenets that spread like roots
and those that spread like branches? If the branches are his successors, do the
roots represent his ideas spreading to his *predeccessors*?)



The authors see Hume prefiguring both Karl Marx and Max Weber. 

In making the case for Hume’s support for European minorities, the authors write:

"Hume had written sympathetically about the Jewish money lenders in York, who
in 1189-90 were severely persecuted under King John. About 500 of them were
burned to death to annul outstanding debts." (47)

A reader might be forgiven for thinking that King John had ordered 500 Jews
burned at the stake in York at that time. But our authors’ contention faces
several problems, the foremost of which is that John did not become king of
England until 1199, a decade after which he was supposedly persecuting Jews.
What’s more, every source I can find gives a number of about 150 Jews... who
actually burned themselves, by lighting fire to the tower where they had sought
the crown’s refuge from an angry mob. This was certainly an awful incident, as
the Jews in the tower only lit it on fire due to their fear of the mob
besieging it. But to find this incident so inaccurately described in a book of
"historical scholarship" is troubling. At the very least, could the authors not
have consulted an online list of the monarchs of England, to see if John
actually reigned when they claimed he did?

The authors contend that the topics Hume's status as an economist is bolstered
by noting that the topics he addressed... "Population, Industry, Coin..
Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes..." still constitute the
core of economics, and that that there is a "dearth of genuinely novel
phenomena" (53) taken up since Hume. This evaluation essentially wipes the
marginalist revolution and the emergence of economics as the study of choice in
general under conditions of scarcity (see Robbins) out of the history of the
subject.

The authors also mention, in order to cement Hume's status as a precursor to
much of modern economics that:

"Many of the formal principles and methods the became de rigueur in
twentieth-century economics — game theory, decision theory, and the binomial
theorem — were formulated before Hume... Much of the differential and integral
calculus that was adopted in economics by the end of the nineteenth century had
been cemented by the mid-eighteenth century by, for example, Jean d’Alembert,
whom Hume had befriended." (53)

OK, very well, but what in the world does the fact that Hume had befriended an
important figure in calculus, which came to be extensively used in economics a
century after Hume's death, have to do with Hume's status as an economist? And
if, as the authors arguably contend, the binomial theorem is actually important
to modern economics, how is it relevant to our evaluation of Hume's status as an
economist that *someone else* had developed it before he wrote about economics?


Hume's own take on the status of natural laws: that we have no real knowledge
of causes, and no reason to think natural laws always have and always will
hold, clearly undermines his argument against accepting evidence for miracles
(they violate natural laws, so we should never believe in them). But Hume's
prejudice against religion was clearly more important to him than was
consistency. Since they discuss both of these aspects of Hume's thought, they
ought to have noted this discrepancy.


The authors do not seem to realize that Holy Eucharist and Reconciliation are
two different Catholic sacraments, as they confuse "transubstantiaiton" with
"absolution": "Hume pointed out that market exchange is
analogous to the metamorphosis that Roman Catholics invoke with the ritual of
transubstantiation. Although absolution requires only 'a certain form of words,
along with a certain intention, [it] changes entirely the nature of an external
object, and even of a human creature.'" (101)

Schabas and Wennerlind briefly mention Hume's take on the infamous enclosures,
noting, "He blamed the English peasantry for their poor work habits and lack of
initiative. With hindsight, Hume argued, it was clear that they benefited from
the enclosures by being forced to become more industrious and frugal" (109).
The authors let this pass without comment, but it does seriously call into
question how sincere Hume was in his defense of property rights. The peasants
had generations-old rights to the commons that were being stolen from them, but
apparently Hume thought this was fine, so long as it made them work harder! One
wonders what he would have thought of a proposal to take all of *his* property
from him, since then he would *really* start producing.


“Hume makes plain that, while prices fluctuate because of supply and demand,
the core or long-standing price is governed by the costs of production...”
(148) Here, it is hard to know if the authors are just *mentioning* Hume's
mistake, since their "makes plain" seems to indicate they actually believe it.
If the latter is true, that is puzzling: that Hume did not anticipate the
Marginalist Revolution by a century is not surprising, but it is now 150 years
in our past, and anyone writing today ought to realize that there *are* no
"costs of production" separate from "supply and demand": the cost of using my
labor to produce nails *is* the demand for my labor in its most valuable
alternative employment.


"Inasmuch as Hume identified the significance of a variety of self-correcting
mechanisms, money had achieved a considerable degree of autonomy from human
agency" (176). This is a very strange contention: all of the "self-correcting
mechanisms" are themselves the result of humans acting. Specie does not make
its own way out of a country experiencing inflation: it leaves because human
agents are employing it to buy cheaper goods from abroad.

The penultimate chapter highlights Hume's general support for free trade. It
demostrates that Hume had an inkling of Ricardo's "comparative advantage" case
for free trade, as well as anticipating "infant industry" arguments for
restricting trade in special cases. Besides the economic benefits Hume saw
accruing from free trade, he also argued that nations tied by trade would be
less likely to go to war with each other.

In conclusion, while I have quibbles with various particulars in this book, it
is nevertheless an interesting survey of Hume's economic thought, which makes a
convincing case that his importance as an economist has been underestimated. I
highly recommend it to both Hume scholars and historians of economic thought.



### References
