# The Virtues of Limits


David McPherson 
Oxford University Press 
2022


In an age which glorifies going beyond limits, McPherson highlights the importance of "recognizing proper limits in human life" 1.

He focuses on the "limiting virtues" of "humility, reverence, moderation, contentment, neighborliness, and loyalty " 1

He discusses these virtues in relation to four kinds of limits: "(1) existential limits; (2) moral limits; (3) political limits; and (4) economic limits" 1

He writes that the master limiting virtue is humility, because it reigns in our tendency to "play God," or what McP also
calls "the Promethean spirit." As one prominent example of that spirit, McP cites Nietzsche and the murder of God, leaving
us in a situation in which "We must play God," and transcend humanity by becoming "ubermensch." Nietzsche's epigones
today call themselves "transhumanists," and hope to leave behind the human condition not, like Nietzsche, through the
will, but largely through medical and technological sorcery.

McP takes on notable legal theorist Ronald Dworkin's embrace of genetic engineering, in that it treats children as
manufactured products from which all defects are to be removed, rather than as gifts to be accepted.



Chesterton: " there is no sense in not appreciating things; and there is no sense in having more of them if you have less appreciation of them." 37



43: Cohen on the need for belonging


44: suicide and euthanasia


48: Interestingly, McPherson turns to the Confucian tradition when he wants to discuss reverence.

52: Citing the work of Sarah Buss, McPherson argues that good manners help to form a virtuous character, by inculcating a proper sense of respect for others.



60: Aristotle on how we must control our animal appetites

61: basic table manners are a way of taming and controlling our animal appetite for food and humanizing it

The person who said Asians slurp their soup because their cultures are "more relaxed."


62: similarly, in regards to sex, we transform lust into romantic love.


64:
McPherson argues that the best case for respecting absolute limits on what we may do, such as killing innocent people
being forbidden, rests on reverence. And he shows the flaws in several other approaches to defending these absolute
prohibitions, such as Stuart Hampshire's contention that they avoid "moral anarchy."



71: the proper role of partiality in the moral life.

Ordo amoris


75: the more I love humanity in general the less I love particular people


78: Aristotle: "Those who are many-friended, and treat everyone they meet as if they were their own kin, seem to be friends with no one."

81: Gilbert Meilaender: "We did not create ourselves; we simply find ourselves here..."





McPherson does not seem to give quite enough weight to the limit limits on loyalty. He considers a questionable case
where a son turns in his father for stealing a sheep, and Confucius condemns the son. Perhaps sheep stealing is not a
serious enough crime to justify overturning filial bonds, but what about rape, or murder? Surely one's father could do
something so heinous that one would have no moral choice but to turn him in?


89: contra Nussbaum, cosmopolitanism is a form of us versus them thinking, allowing the cosmopolitans to look down upon patriotic rubes.



91: Sandel: " we learn to love humanity not in general but through its particular expressions"


103: 
Rawls and Cohen, declaring a person's natural endowment and circumstances of birth and upbringing as "arbitrary from a
moral point of view" are guilty of a lack of reverence for the world, and our circumstances in it as given to us. They
are waging "a metaphysical crusade against contingency," McPherson, quoting David Wiggins, notes. This is a very
important point, as it undermines Rawls' claim that his political principles are neutral between different comprehensive
conceptions of the good life: in fact, they are dismissive of a conception of the good life based on such nostrums as
"we should count our blessings and not be envious of others."


McPherson notes that Ronald Dworkin has actually elevated envy, a vice, to a "standard of justice." 106



114: contra Cohen's utopianism


115: McPherson too readily accepts the common view of Plato's The Republic as being utopian.

116: utopia are at war with reality


119: "It is better to focus on realizing the good that is possible, and one of the most important reasons for objecting to utopian thinking is that it is counterproductive to realizing this good."


121: a strange list for moderation â€” Plato's "city of pigs"


131: "endless economic growth... is senseless without knowing what it is *for*."

133: " however, liberalism is in fact, not really neutral, since it ends up endorsing a particular conception of the good life, namely, the life of the choosing, preference-satisfying self"


136: McPherson does a good job debunking the libertarian case for unlimited wealth acquisition, which he finds exemplified in the work of Jason Brennan. Brennan cranes, the unlimited acquisition of wealth for enabling us to get what we want, well, ignoring the fact that living a good life is much more about learning to want the right things.


He counters Brennan with Jesus and the gospels.

139: "Precisely because of how greater wealth enables us to get more of what we want... it gives more free rein to our
desires, and can encourage their multiplication in a way that is unconnected with living a good life, and thus it can
lead ... to our being enslaved to our insatiable desires."

143: unlike some critics of homo economicus, McPherson correctly, understands that the rational choice model of human
behavior does not exclude ethical preferences. But, he argues, the irrational choice model "distorts the nature of
ethical reasons which recognize normative standards... for what we ought to desire, and so should not be regarded as
mere preferences among other preferences."

145: was that really a lament on the part of Marx?

147: Wendell Berry

161: "even if one is not a theist, one can recognize the importance of the harmony that is sought here."

But is that really true?



One curious absence in the book is any discussion of transgenderism: rejection of ones given sex and the employment of
unnecessary drugs and mutilating surgery in order to become more like the opposite sex is about a radical rejection of
the "accepting-appreciating stance" as is possible, but McPherson never mentions it. And perhaps he was wise to avoid
doing so, since touching on such a divisive topic might have distracted from his overall thesis.


Now no book can possibly deal with every person who has ever written anything on a topic related to its subject.
I may be guilty here of simply griping that this book does not mention some of my favorite thinkers, but I will take that risk, and plunge ahead.


"The politics of imperfection" but no Oakeshott.

I also think that McPherson's work could benefit from referencing the work of Iain McGilchrist on the differences
between right-hemisphere and left-hemisphere thinking, which map quite nicely onto McPherson's differentiation of the
appreciative view and the controlling view.

But these are very minor quibbles: this is an excellent book, clear, concise, and not overburdened with references, but
engaging sufficiently with the relevant literature that an interested reader can explore further. And at a time when so
much of our culture regards any limits as abhorrent, and keeps telling us that we can "have it all," it is also a very
timely work.




 
