Plutocratic Socialism: The Future of Private Property and the Fate of the
Middle Class
==========================================================

Mark T. Mitchell

*Plutocratic Socialism: The Future of Private Property and the Fate of the
Middle Class*

Eugene, OR: Front Porch Republic Books, 2022. 165 pages.

---

Mark Mitchell has written a brief and interesting book arguing that the
widespread ownership of productive property is an essential support for
political liberty.
As he puts it: "The thesis of this book is simple: democracy without private
property is fundamentally unstable and will not survive." (14)
On this point, I wish Mitchell had addressed Plato's case that democracy, even
with private property, is fundamentally unstable.
(Or, to cite a more recent political theorist, the Nigerian musician and
activist, Fela Kuti, called democracy a "demonstration of crazy.")
Perhaps he has a good answer
to Plato and Kuti here, but if so, it is missing from this work.





In the introduction, Mitchell makes a curious distinction as to whether people
believe the most common future form of government would be "democratic" or
"socialist." (p. 1) This ignores the fact that there is almost certainly a
great overlap between the two beliefs. Now perhaps Mitchell holds with Hayek
that in the long run democratic socialism is unstable and will cease to be
either democratic or socialist, and perhaps that view is correct, but this is
an opinion poll, and if people think future governments will be both democratic
and socialist, well, that is what they think.


Mitchell spends a good amount of the book discussing the history of attitudes
towards private property beginning with the Bible, continuing with Plato,
Aristotle, Aquinas, Locke, the American founders, Tocqueville, Marx, Ropke, and
more. He makes it clear that many people have supported the idea of private
property, for many reasons. This material is interesting, but I can't help
feeling that Mitchell would have been better off writing two books: one a pure
history of the idea of property, and the other his argument for the widespread
ownership of productive property, which would use historical material only to
buttress his case. By combining the two, the history section feels a little rushed, and
not entirely connected to his main argument.

That Mitchell is not a free market ideologue is made clear in his approvingly
citing the limits on private property existing in Mosaic law:

"The Mosaic law explicitly limits the use of property. For instance, harvesters
are commanded not to reap to the very edge of their fields, and owners of
voneyards not to go over the vineyards a second time or pick up the fruits that
have fallen to the ground. These are to be left behind for the poor and the
alien. In short, ownership of property includes responsibility to the
community, which entails limits on the use of one's own property." (21)

But neither is he a socialist, any quotes with apprehension the World Economic
Forum's prediction that by 2030, "You’ll own nothing. And you’ll be happy."
(30)

In a rare outright slip up, Mitchell writes:
"The pilgrims found themselves on the edge of an unexplored continent" (34).
Well, no: there had been people on the continent for thousands and thousands of
years, and they had explored it pretty thoroughly. One need not give woeness a
full embrace to realize the problem with statements like this one.



Mitchell also misinterprets a contention of Madison’s. He first notes that
"Madison continues by suggesting that unstable laws create an advantage for the
'moneyed few' over the 'industrious and uninformed mass of the people.'" Madison
goes on to explain that this is because those with money and financial savvy
can pay close attention to how the laws will affect relative prices and thus
gain by speculation, a pastime not available to, say, a farmer preoccupied with
his crops and herds. Mitchell then sums up Madison’s argument: "In other words,
laws that create an advantage for the wealthy and disadvantage the poor are
unjust and are a sign of public instability" (50). Mitchell's contention that
laws which deliberately favor the rich are unjust and will create instability
is certainly true, but it is **not** what Madison was saying. Rather, Madison
was pointing out that rapidly fluctuating laws, whatever their supposed
intention, in fact will favor the wealthy, since the rich have the time and
resources to carefully track those changes in the law. (Think of how large
corporations today favor complex and ever-changing regulations and tax codes,
which their smaller competitors find difficult to navigate.)

Mitchell makes a very persuasive case that the American founders were quite
concerned with the issue of how property was distributed in their new republic.
None of them are good for complete equality and property ownership,
understanding that such a condition would be almost impossible to create, and
once created, would be highly unstable. But they also were greatly concerned
about "too great" a degree of inequality in property ownership. For example, he
quotes Madison advocating laws that, "without violating the rights of property,
reduce extreme wealth toward a state of mediocrity, and raise extreme indigence
towards a state of comfort" (58). Of course, the devil is in the details here:
how much wealth is "extreme"? How much indigence is "extreme"? And how exactly
can laws eliminate these extremes "without violating the rights of property"?


"history has clearly shown that the dictatorship of the working class never
materializes. The revolution is invariably hijacked by a plutocratic minority
intent on securing power and wealth" (69)


Tocqueville:
"What should one expect from a man who has spent 20 years of his life in making pinheads?" (71)
Ultimately, "the man in him is degraded as the worker in him is perfected."
A society of perfect workers and degraded man is not one conducive to freedom. (72)


Distributism Schumacher
"Is work a blessing or a curse?" (75)



"too little consideration is given to human scale in our economic arrangements" (84)

"Work instead of being a satisfaction and fulfillment of life becomes a mere
means and the hours spent at work a mere liability, whereas normally these
ought to represent an asset in the balance sheet of life." Röpke (85)

"The proletariat is bereft of productive property and therefore his options are
constricted, for all his decisions must be made in terms of exchange." (86)





Mitchell quotes Mises: "if workers... 'changed their locations and occupations
according to the requirements of the labor market, they could eventually find
work.'" (86)

This quote offers an extremely important insight into the libertarian view of
the human being: A person is a capital good, and as such, should be available
to be picked up and moved anywhere in the world that capital needs him to be.
The fact that this person might have family, friends, a church, and a community
in a place that they feel affection for are, in this view, all simply barriers
to higher productivity. All of those things can be replaced by a bigger
flatscreen TV and a nice new leather recliner.

One problem with this book is that I find myself agreeing with many of
Mitchell's suggestions, but simultaneously thinking "this does not have a
snowball's chance in hell of going anywhere." For example, consider his
suggestion that, to encourage entrepreneurship, "Excessive regulations that
create barriers to entry should be eliminated" (137). Yes, they should be, but
under the current regime, they are not going to be. Should some law maker
propose a measure that would truly lower barriers to entry, The proposal would
be denounced as allowing businesses to trash the environment, evade taxes, and
exploit workers. The mere fact that Mitchell's suggestion is a good idea will
not protect it the storm of propaganda that attempting to implement it would
invoke.

Consider something as obviously harmful as our nation's subsidizing huge
mono-crop fields of corn and soybeans: the environmental destruction of the
soil and the water (from chemical runoff from the fields) is vast, it makes
our farm economy vastly less diverse, it increases the risk of economic
catastrophe should a disease strike either crop, and the benefits accrue
mostly to wealthier farmers. But there is no significant movement to get rid of
them. How much less chance would a much more easily attacked bill like one
dropping business regulations have?





