# Keynes, Churchill, and the Governance of Economic Beliefs

James Ashley Morrison

Cornell: Cornell University Press

2021


Morrison makes a great deal of the fact that "the" gold standard meant very
different things in different times and places. No doubt he is right about
that: but given it is so, how can one use this specific incident involving this
particular version of the gold standard to dismiss all of the multifarious
version?


Morrison discusses how Burke thought that governance should proceed “‘upon the
principle of reference to antiquity.’”

He then goes on to say “this was ‘the Whig[s’] interpretation of history,” and
cites Butterfield. But this is pretty much the opposite of what Butterfield men
by “the Whig interpretation of history,” which saw History as steady progress
forward from a benighted antiquity.


Morrison makes the point that attitudes towards monetary policy resembled
religious beliefs. Then he makes it again. And again. And again. Words like
“dogma,“ “creed,“ and “heresy“ are littered liberally throughout the text. This
reader cannot help but feel that Morrison took an interesting contention and
belabored it so much that he was tempted to reject it simply because it was
being pushed on him so often. 

For someone so enamored of this religious metaphor, Morrison appears to be
remarkably ignorant of religion itself. For instance, he writes, “Because the
gold standard was a matter of religious faith, all expected that adherence to
it would defy logic and rationality” (37). Does Morrison know nothing of the
numerous Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Taoist, and Hindu philosophers
who have argued that religion does not "defy logic and rationality”?

And what about the members of the Cunliffe Committee themselves? They justified
to return to gold based on the fact that “the adoption of a currency not
convertible at will into gold… Is likely in practice to lead to over-issue and
to destroy the measure of exchangeable value and cause a general rise in all
prices and an adverse movement in the foreign exchanges” (quoted on 42). While
perhaps the committee members were *wrong* on this point, it certainly looks as
if they thought they had perfectly rational reasons to want to return to the
gold standard!

A few pages later, Morrison himself provides this interesting fact: "[In 1914]
the banks smallest denomination banknote was 5 pounds. Equivalent to
roughly 550 pounds in 2020 pounds..." So, the previous century saw the value of
the pound *drop 100-fold**. It cetainly seems as though the committee's worry
that going off gold would cause "a general rise in all prices" was not only a
rational concern, but a fully justified one!


"Just as the earliest people conjure the supernatural as the superintendents of
the seasons, so to have modern people created economic religions to describe
some meaning, purpose, and direction to the forces that govern our lives." (7)

This is historically inaccurate, as deities like the Greek pantheon were not
super natural, but were what Eric Voegelin calls “intra-cosmic gods,“ very much
a part of the natural order. And it relies upon the long discredited view of
religion as merely an early and very bad attempt at doing science.


Morrison goes on to spend several pages listing all of the issues over which
British monetary experts disagreed in the post-WWI period. Their debates sound
very much like a group of people engaged in a debate over the best course of
practical action, and hardly like a cult adhering to some dogma. But this
doesn't stop Morrison from referring to them as "apostles" (45).


