We Have Never Been Woke

Musa al-Gharbi


I would like to alert, university book and readers to an excellent and important book that is out this autumn: Musa al-Gharbi's *We have never been woke*.

The central thesis of the book is not original to Al Garvey: Wokeness is much more about performance than about
substance. For instance, John Gray and I both agreed on this point in my interview with him in *Modern Age*: our elites
are happy to do things like spell black with a B when it refers to African-Americans, and essentially costless gesture
that does nothing to improve the lives of our fellow citizens who most need our help. Imagine heading into some rundown
housing project where the sidewalks are littered with crack files, the walls are covered with graffiti, children walk to
their third-rate school in fear, and announcing "I have just improved all your lives significantly, because I have
agreed to spell black with a capital B!"

The main excellence of al-Gharbi's book lies not in the originality of its central insight, but in the way the author
has meticulously, systematically, and extensively documented its truth. And a secondary excellence is that he shows that
"great awokenings" have occurred three times previously among American elites.


Al-Gharbi documents how the current "awokening" is the fourth such episode, the first kicking off in the 1920s, the
second in the 1960s, the third in the 1980s and the fourth being launched around 2011. (It would've been interesting if
he had looked back into the 19th century's religious awakening was to see how they might've been similar to the last
century social movements. But, of course, this book was already a massive undertaking, so it would be unfair to ask more
of it.)

Al-Gharbi notes that the Great Awokening of the 1920s was "far more intense than any that followed." 81. That was the
less it was similar to those that followed in many ways, for instance, in being driven largely by well-to-do
professionals, and by doing very little to actually improve the position of the truly disadvantaged. He quotes George
Orwell from that time: "The typical Socialist... while theoretically pining for a classless society, cling like glue to
their miserable fragments of social prestige... to them, the whole Socialist movement is no more than a kind of exciting
heresy-hunt..." looking for a "right-wing deviationist"

As with subsequent awokenings, The first one was sparked by anxiety among the greatly increased number of university
students as to whether, as the Great Depression deepened, the elite position they thought they deserved would actually
be there for them. While they rhetorically backed "Negro," feminist and similar causes, their actual demands were for
more security for themselves. They came to support FDR because "contrary to their radical rhetoric, they wanted
relatively high status jobs and socioeconomically comfortable lives far more than they wanted to *actually* overthrow
the existing order. And the Roosevelt administration provided what they wanted." 85

The vast programs undertaken by the New Deal provided anxious students with large numbers of comfortable, well paid
positions, leading them to become "the establishment" that the students of the 1960s revolted against. And that
Awokening was also prompted by students anxiety about their future surging, due to a weakening economy and the threat of
being drafted to fight in Vietnam in the latter half of 1960s. As al-Gharbi explains, it was only when the exemption
from the draft for college graduates was eliminated that the student anti-war protest movement kicked off. The Vietnam
War became far more morally objectionable to students once they were at risk of having to fight it. As al-Gharbi puts
it, "middle-class students became 'radical' precisely when their plans to leave the fighting in Vietnam to minorities
and the poor by enrolling in college... began to fall through" 88
And Richard Nixon correctly saw that ending the draft would starve the student protest movement of fuel.

The third and the current "Great Awokenings" have followed similar patterns: when aspiring elites find their past to
elite status threatened, they begin to rail against the current order. 

What each of the "Great Awokenings" having common is elite overproduction. 





I'm going to mention some of al-Gharbi's findings here without defending them, because he has defended them perfectly
adequately in the 45 pages of citations at the end of his book. So if you want evidence for these facts, please buy his
book.

The first significant finding I want to mention, is that the most places in the country, the deep blue cities in blue
states, also have the highest income inequality and the most segregation in the nation. I saw the ladder myself, when I
moved from brownstone Brooklyn to Columbia, South Carolina, and immediately saw that Columbia was far more racially
integrated than Brooklyn.



261: al Gharbi admits can he opens his book highlighting his African-American heritage to learn authority to the text
and to deflect criticism that would've been directed at it if it had been written by a white person. 

266: if a consecrated minority begins to question the beliefs of symbolic capitalists, the audience does not re-examine
their own beliefs to determine if perhaps they got the interests of a minority group wrong: instead, they find a new
voice from that group who will tell them what they want to hear, and consecrate that person. This happened to, for
instance, Dave Chappelle, when he started saying things that symbolic capitalists did not want to hear.


269: Musa points out that it is the white who are most privileged, the symbolic capitalists, who are most anxious to
accuse others of not "checking their privilege," and to point the finger at the least privileged white people — the
rural poor and working class whites — as being "the problem."

Musa never really explains what he means by "racialized" inequalities. 

Educating people about "white privilege" only leads privileged whites to hold poor whites in greater contempt. 


Do poor rural whites actually have any "privilege" at all due to their race? Let's consider a poor railway person and
poor black person from essentially identical family and economic backgrounds. 

There is lots of sound class based in analysis in the book: does the constant introduction of race actually aid this
analysis, or only muddy the waters?


Why is it "white supremacy" rather than "elite supremacy"? (Sam Kriss)


The Son Also Rises: Gregory Clark


Quit these racial discrepancies between black and whites perhaps not be fully explained by the fact that 200 years ago,
100% of elite families in the US were white, and 0% were black. And since elite status tends to persist over many
generations, it is no surprise that today, much larger proportion of the elite or white than are black.


The current economic system needs an underclass, and the urban black poor fill that role well. But so do the rural white
poor.







some unfortunate manager asked a couple of black cooks to come up with a lunch for African-American history month. And
what they served was something like fried chicken, collard greens, black-eyed peas, and Kool-Aid. Now I regularly play
music in black churches in South Carolina, and except for the Kool-Aid (it would be sweet tea) this meal would be a big
hit at any of them. In fact, it would be a big hit with most white people down here as well.

And, in fact, it's a meal that would be eaten much more often by black Americans then what is served on St. Patrick's
Day is eaten by Irish Americans: my family, a corn, beef and cabbage exactly once per year, on St. Patrick's Day. And we
never drank green beer.

But a black student at our school complained, and the university pressured the catering company to fire somebody. It
wouldn't do to fire the black fellows who designed the menu, so they just went up the chain until they found a white
person, and fired him.

What is interesting to know here is that the person fired was a working class guy probably struggling to make ends meet
doing food service, while the complainant, being a student at a prestigious, engineering school, is destined for high
career earnings. 





