# Confronting Leviathan: A History of Ideas

David Runciman

Profile Book Ltd., London, 2022

ISBN: 978-1-78816-783-3



Gray: "For Hobbes humans are like machines, in that their behavior is covered by the laws of nature." (10)


In his chapter on Arendt, Runciman comments upon her claim, "All that the giant computers proves that the modern age was
wrong to believe with Hobbes that rationality, in the sense of 'reckoning with consequences' is the highest and most human
of man's capacities." Runciman goes on to say, "The word that stands out for me in that sentence is not 'Hobbes'; it is
'giant'... She saw computers, dominating human beings by scale, not just by scale of processing speed: this was almost
by physical scale..." (193-194).

This is an absurd interpretation of Arendt's claim: She is clearly concerned with the "reckoning" power of computers.
The fact that this increased, at that time, with their visible signs, is a trivial and contingent aspect of the point
she is making it is hard to imagine why that particular word "stood out" for Runciman.




## Generated

Title: Confronting Leviathan: A Refreshing Analysis of Power and Democracy

Author: Davide Runciman
Genre: Political Science
Publication Date: 2018

Davide Runciman's "Confronting Leviathan" offers readers a thought-provoking exploration of power and democracy in the
contemporary world. Through a nuanced and refreshing analysis, Runciman challenges conventional wisdom and interrogates
the fragile nature of democratic systems.

Runciman, a renowned political scientist and thinker, tackles the central question of how power operates in democratic
societies. By drawing on examples from both historical and modern contexts, he boldly asserts that power and democracy
are intertwined, with the former being an ever-present force that shapes and influences the latter. Runciman argues that
traditional notions of democratic control are fading away, allowing power to manifest itself in different, often
unnoticed, forms.

One of the book's strengths lies in its accessible writing style, allowing readers to engage with complex ideas without
feeling overwhelmed. Runciman fluidly navigates between theory and practicality, offering real-world examples to support
his arguments. His ability to translate complex concepts into relatable terms enables readers to connect with the
material and grasp the implications of his analyses effectively.

Drawing from a wide range of sources, including political theory, sociology, and history, Runciman constructs a
compelling narrative that encourages readers to question their assumptions about power and democracy. He investigates
how power structures have shifted from overt authoritarianism to subtler, more insidious forms, such as mass
surveillance, corporate influence, and technology's impact on political discourse. Runciman posits that these insidious
modes of control are at odds with the ideals of democracy, warning that our complacency may be jeopardizing the system
itself.

Another notable aspect of Runciman's work is his commitment to engaging with alternative viewpoints. While he presents a
persuasive argument, he remains conscious of the complexities surrounding power dynamics and democratic systems.
Runciman does not shy away from presenting counter-arguments or addressing potential weaknesses in his own analysis,
further strengthening the overall credibility of his work.

The only minor drawback of "Confronting Leviathan" is its occasionally dense subject matter, which might require readers
to possess a basic understanding of political theory and democratic systems. However, Runciman does strive to mitigate
this by utilizing relatable examples that help bridge the gap between the scholarly and the everyday.

In conclusion, "Confronting Leviathan" is a compelling book that challenges readers to reexamine their notions of power
and democracy. Davide Runciman's engaging writing style, combined with his insightful analysis and inclusion of various
perspectives, makes this a valuable and thought-provoking read. Highly recommended for anyone seeking a fresh
perspective on the complexities of power in democratic societies.
